content/en/blog: GSoC Intel SGX Blog (#80)
unikraft/docs: content/en/blog/2022-07-05-unikraft-gsoc-intel-sgx.md

+++
title = "Improving security and isolation of Unikraft with Intel SGX "
date = "2022-06-13T00:00:00+01:00"
authors = [
  "Xiangyi Meng"
]
tags = ["Security", "Intel SGX"]

> +++

Reviewer: Please add the GSoC banner to the article as shown here: https://github.com/unikraft/docs/blob/main/content/en/blog/2022-05-21-unikraft-gsoc-org.md

```
<img width="100px" src="https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/assets/media/gsoc-2022-badge.svg" align="right" />
```

> +++
> Trusted execution environment (TEE), especially Intel SGX, is a popular and powerful tool to provide hardware-based isolation for highly sensitive code and data. Today’s commercial clouds (Microsoft Azure DCsv2, DCsv3/DCdsv3 series, IBM Cloud Bare Metal z15 series, and Alibaba Cloud Bare Metal Instance) more or less have provided their support to Intel SGX. As a powerful and cloud-ready unikernel development kit, Unikraft should enable this feature to give users an option to protect their sensitive code and data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+++

Trusted execution environment (TEE), especially Intel SGX, is a popular and powerful tool to provide hardware-based isolation for highly sensitive code and data. Today’s commercial clouds (Microsoft Azure DCsv2, DCsv3/DCdsv3 series, IBM Cloud Bare Metal z15 series, and Alibaba Cloud Bare Metal Instance) more or less have provided their support to Intel SGX. As a powerful and cloud-ready unikernel development kit, Unikraft should enable this feature to give users an option to protect their sensitive code and data.
```

> Trusted execution environment (TEE), especially Intel SGX, is a popular and powerful tool to provide hardware-based isolation for highly sensitive code and data. Today’s commercial clouds (Microsoft Azure DCsv2, DCsv3/DCdsv3 series, IBM Cloud Bare Metal z15 series, and Alibaba Cloud Bare Metal Instance) more or less have provided their support to Intel SGX. As a powerful and cloud-ready unikernel development kit, Unikraft should enable this feature to give users an option to protect their sensitive code and data.

Reviewer: Refer Unikraft's interest in security by linking this: https://github.com/unikraft/docs/blob/main/content/en/docs/features/security.md

> This blog briefly describes the concepts behind TEE, Intel SGX and the ongoing work that implements Intel SGX supports in Unikraft.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blog briefly describes the concepts behind TEE, Intel SGX and the ongoing work that implements Intel SGX support in Unikraft.
```

Reviewer: Please add this is part of GSoC'22.

> ## TEE and Intel SGX
> Quoted from Wikipedia:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## TEE and Intel SGX

Quoted from Wikipedia:
```

Consider this from a practical application scenario, if the tenant does not trust the cloud service provider, then with the presence of TEE, the tenant can isolate the sensitive information and code they have from other data via TEE (Intel SGX), thus making it impossible for the cloud service provider to access the data that needs to be protected. Unikraft is committed to providing efficient and secure cloud services to its users, thus, TEE is a must for Unikraft.

> ## How to?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to?

```

Thanks to the open-source community, we have lots of reference to learn from, such as [linux-sgx-driver](https://github.com/intel/linux-sgx-driver) and [freebsd-sgx](https://github.com/bukinr/freebsd-sgx). Enabling Intel SGX in Unikraft is a huge task, as we need to port both the driver and the SDK to the Unikraft platform. Although drivers and SDKs on different OSs are open-sourced, we still need to significantly modify them, which removes the OS-specific things and converts them to Unikraft-specific features and dependencies.

> ## Progress

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Progress

```

> Currently, we are working on porting the driver into Unikraft. As of now, the following functions are finished:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, we are working on porting the driver into Unikraft. As of now, the following functions are completed:
```

> - The probing of SGX. That is to say, Unikraft can be aware of SGX if enabled in `make menuconfig`. And as inspired by linux-sgx-driver, the uksgx library registers a device /dev/sgx to the devfs, and some stub ioctl function is added to the library, in order to provide a unified and easy interaction channel between uksgx and the applications. But please notice that ioctl is not the Unikraft-ish way to interact with devices/internal-libs. Now, that's only for the test and compatibility with the existing codes and SDKs and will be refactored to more straightforward implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The probing of SGX. That is to say, Unikraft can be aware of SGX if enabled in `make menuconfig`. And as inspired by `linux-sgx-driver`, the `uksgx` library registers a device `/dev/sgx` to `devfs`, and some stub `ioctl()` function is added to the library, in order to provide a unified and easy interaction channel between `uksgx` and applications. But please notice that `ioctl` is not the Unikraft-ish way to interact with devices / internal-libs. At this point, this is only for testing and for compatibility with the existing codes and SDKs; it will be refactored to more straightforward implementation.
```

- A simple ring-0/ring-3 switch utility is added to the library because SGX ENCLU instruction must be executed under ring-3. This part involves some modification of the GDT/TSS part in platform code. (This utility only switch the CPL, but does not change the code/data section, according to the design rationale Unikraft)

> - The mapping from the physical address of Enclave Page Cache to a legal virtual address is added to the page map used by Unikraft. This is the foundation of the following works, which highly relies on the virtual memory APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The mapping from the physical address of Enclave Page Cache to a legal virtual address is added to the page map used by Unikraft. This is the foundation of the following work items, which highly rely on the virtual memory API.
```

> ## Next steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Next steps

```

> Next, we are going to implement the creation of an enclave, which is mainly handled by the `sgx_ioc_enclave_create` function in `sgx_ioctl.c`. Such creation required lots of steps, such as validating the parameters, allocating EPC pages and perform a SGX instruction `ECREATE`. Details could be founded at the draft [PR](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/pull/474).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we are going to implement the creation of an enclave, which is mainly handled by the `sgx_ioc_enclave_create` function in `sgx_ioctl.c`. Such creation required lots of steps, such as validating the parameters, allocating EPC pages and perform a SGX instruction `ECREATE`. For detailed information check  [the draft PR](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/pull/474).
```
